<!-- <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div> -->

 # 10. Time Management for Customer Service:
 
  - Time management is the process of consciously planning and controlling time spent on specific tasks to increase how efficient you are. You may be familiar with setting deadlines, writing to-do lists, and giving yourself small rewards for accomplishing certain activities.

  - Motivating ourselves is a core part of time management—and it takes a bit of effort not only to motivate yourself but to cultivate good habits to work and live more efficiently.

  - Time management is the process of planning and controlling how much time to spend on specific activities. Good time management enables an individual to complete more in a shorter period of time, lowers stress, and leads to career success.

### <ins>**How to Improve Your Time Management Skills**</ins>

#### General Time-Management Tools
 - Mind Tools has a range of resources designed to improve your time management overall. These offer practical solutions to common time-management challenges, as well as ways to change key habits for the better.

 - How to Be More Organized explains why your environment needs to be as organized as your thinking! There are practical tips from highly organized people, plus ideas for using technology to take more control of your time.

 - And, since good time management relies on planning, recording and reflecting on your activities, we explain some of the best-known tools for doing this, including Activity Logs, To-Do Lists and Action Programs.

#### Prioritization

 - You can achieve more when you start dedicating time to the right things. But how do you know what those things are?

 - Eisenhower's Urgent/Important Principle is a way to distinguish between demands, so that you prioritize them wisely.

 - The Action Priority Matrix includes a downloadable worksheet for exploring how much time to give to different activities (if you should be doing them at all!).

 - And our article, Managing Conflicting Priorities, explains what to do if priorities clash.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

#### Scheduling

 - You may know what you need to do – but when should you do it? Timing is everything.

 - It pays to get tough tasks done while you’re still feeling fresh, for example, as we explain in Is This a "Morning" Task?

 - And you can boost your efficiency, gain people’s trust, and use adrenaline to your advantage, by reading How to Meet a Deadline.

#### Goal Setting

 - The most successful "time managers" have clear targets to aim for. They develop SMART Goals, allowing them to allocate their time effectively.

 - Treasure Mapping is a powerful way to see your goals clearly – so that you're motivated to give them the time they need. Personal Mission Statements are also helpful for being organized and staying committed to your plans.

#### Concentration and Focus

 - It's no good just making the time to pursue your priorities. You have to use that time well, too. We have a collection of resources devoted to doing just that, including advice on minimizing distractions, and getting into a focused state of "flow."

 - There's also detailed guidance on using your time well when you're working from home, and when you're doing your job on the move.

#### Benefits of time management
- Good time management can lead to a healthy, balanced lifestyle that may manifest as:

  · Reducing stress

  · Increasing energy

  · Achieving goals more efficiently

  · Prioritizing what's important

  · Accomplishing more in less time

  · Reducing procrastination

  · Boosting confidence

  · Getting further in your career or education

 <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
 
 ## Time management strategies
  If you’re looking to take control of your time, here are six tips and strategies to get you started:

**1. Conduct a time audit.**

- Start by assessing where you actually spend your time. Create a visual map of the approximate hours you spend on work, school, housework and chores, commuting, social media, and leisure activities. Then, you can drill in on school or work, dividing your previous week into days, then hours. How much time did it take to finish that paper? Did a work project take longer because you were scrolling on your phone?

- Set goals based on this outcome. Planning ahead and setting time limits on your tasks and priorities can free up time for what’s most important to you, like spending more time with friends and family.

- Start by dedicating a half hour every Sunday to intentionally planning your week ahead and setting daily goals.

**2. Use the Eisenhower Matrix to set your priorities.**

- The Eisenhower Matrix is a popular tool that helps you distinguish between tasks that are important, not important, urgent, and not urgent. The quadrant has four boxes in which you can split your tasks to prioritize what you should focus on first. They also correspond with the 4 D’s of execution: do, defer, delegate, and delete.

**· Quadrant 1:** Important and urgent. Do these tasks first. These are the priorities that are most relevant to your goals.

**· Quadrant 2:** Important but not urgent. Defer these for later in your schedule.

**· Quadrant 3:** Urgent but not important. Delegate these to others, if possible, especially if they do not contribute to your long-term goals.

**· Quadrant 4:** Not important and not urgent. Delete these tasks, or do them when you have free time because they are distractions from your priorities.

For an even simpler approach, create a task list and mark each item as urgent or important. Often, we prioritize urgent tasks instead of important ones—such as tasks that may be creative, important, and fulfilling but do not have a deadline—so identifying and labeling them can be a helpful step toward accomplishing your personal and professional goals.

**3. Employ methods to “chunk” your time.**

- Once you have a better idea of what your priorities are, setting limits can be an excellent time management tool. There are several options for chunking your time into digestible pieces.

- Try the Pomodoro method. This technique was developed in the late 1980s by Francesco Cirillo, a university student who was overwhelmed by studying and assignments. The Pomodoro method requires using a timer to break down your work into 25-minute intervals, separated by 5 minutes of break time. After four pomodoros, you may take a longer 15-30 minute break. Pomodoro (“tomato” in Italian) promotes concentration and relieves mental fatigue, which is especially useful for open-ended work like conducting research, studying for an exam, or finishing a consulting project.

**4. Focus on one thing at a time.**

- For most of us, multitasking is generally less efficient than focusing on one task at a time. In fact, one study found that only 2.5 percent of people are able to multitask effectively
. Doing too many things at once can impact your cognitive ability, making you feel unproductive or dissatisfied with your progress. Arranging your time so that you complete one task before starting another can boost your confidence.

- Further, it may be helpful to compartmentalize tasks. If you are a writer, for example, you might dedicate Monday to research, Tuesday through Thursday to writing, and Friday to editing. 

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

**5. Give yourself a reward.**

Rewards can be a great source of motivation for adopting good time management habits. For each important task you accomplish, you can give yourself a little treat. It doesn't need to be extravagant or expensive. Here are some simple ways to motivate yourself:

· Taking a break to enjoy your favorite snack

· Going for a short walk outside

· Call a friend or family member

· Meditate for five minutes

· Listen to a podcast episode or a chapter of an audiobook

- For bigger rewards, you can indulge in activities like reading a book in the bath, planning a night out with friends, or booking a getaway. Exciting rewards can help you push through an especially tough project or work period.

**6. Use apps to block out distractions.**

- Sometimes, rewards and good intentions are not enough to keep us focused. An app or browser extension can help you minimize distractions by blocking you from using social media or touching your phone. Here are some apps and extensions you can try:

· Forest is an app that helps you stay focused and off your phone. The company partners with an organization called Trees for the Future to plant trees when you spend virtual coins earned in Forest.

· StayFocused is a browser extension that prevents you from using time-wasting websites like Reddit, Twitter, Wikipedia, Instagram, and more. It’s highly configurable, so you can customize it to your specific distractions.

· Freedom is a tool that can block both websites and apps on all of your devices, simultaneously. Take advantage of their free trial to know if it’s right for you.

### <ins>What are time management techniques?</ins>

- Time management itself revolves around choices — you decide what you need to do, when you need to finish, and what tasks you need to tackle in order to reach your goals.

- If you choose to make high-value, goal-oriented tasks a priority, finish them before the deadline, but also leave time for leading a healthy life, you'll be able to say that you've managed your time successfully. But how do you do that?

- Well, by using the right time management techniques.

- Time management techniques are a set of rules and principles you need to follow in order to be more productive and efficient with your time, make better and faster decisions, as well as accomplish more in less time and with less effort.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

- There are plenty of time management techniques based on approved time management best practices:
   
   · Writing down what you need to do today
   
   · Working on important and urgent tasks first
   
   · Saving time for priority tasks, routine tasks, but also breaks
   
   · Proper stress management
   
   · Proper team management
   
   · Tracking project progress and identifying lags

- Most time management techniques deal with one or more of the listed points, and you can make the choice for your time management techniques by looking over what you want to improve in your routine.

- 
- Apart from that, you'll also need to consider the time management skills you need to improve and your personal time management style. Moreover, you can choose particular time management techniques for work, so that you better organize your workdays, too.

### <ins>Time management skills</ins>

Effective time management skills include:

**· Setting SMART goals —** make sure the goals you set for yourself are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Time-bound.

**· Effective planning —** make sure you have clear objectives, as well as defined tasks and resources in order to make a clear plan that will lead you to your goals.

**· Stress management —** make sure you manage your stress with stress relieving strategies and tactics, in order to feel more relaxed while doing your work. 

**· Proper task delegation —** delegating tasks helps you ease the workload and share it with competent colleagues and employees.

**· Avoiding distractions —** distractions take away from the time you should be working (or even relaxing), so you should learn how to avoid them.

**· Single-tasking —** focusing on one task at a time helps you deliver quality end results much better than when you multitask.

**· Saying "No" —** this little two-letter word will help you save more time for your own priorities.

**· Setting priorities —** Investing time into the right tasks will ask for less effort, but bring better results. This is also known as the 20/80 rule, or the Pareto principle.

**· Beating procrastination —** Identify the causes of your procrastination and tackle them.

- In order to improve your time management efforts, you'll need to practice these skills.

- Apart from the benefits of managing time at work better, efficient time management is also a vital skill for students.

- Here are the most crucial time management strategies for students:
 
**· Making a master schedule.** Once you have a clear studying agenda, you can make time blocks for particular exams or subjects. This will help you prepare for exams more effectively.

**· Setting deadlines for each study session/task.** For example, set a clear time limit for writing an essay — such as Friday by 5 p.m. — so that you don’t procrastinate.

### Time management styles
Not all time management techniques are suitable for everyone — we don't all work the same, so we don't all face the same time management issues. Everyone has a prevailing time management method of dealing with work, i.e. a time management style, one that brings its own time management issues - if you think about it, you may find that you're a:
  · Time Martyr

  · Procrastinator

  · Distractor

  · Underestimator

  · Firefighter

  · Perfectionist

Let’s review each time management style in more detail.

**Time Martyr**
- You fill your schedules with requests from others, instead of focusing on what's important to you. Your own tasks feel like too much responsibility, so you jump at the chance to take on anything else - you gain validation from others, but neglect the tasks that would bring you self-validation.
- Issues: multitasking, missed deadlines, ineffective scheduling, skipping breaks

**Procrastinator**

- Time Martyrs at least tackle other people's tasks — Procrastinators delay work on everything remotely important to anyone. Some claim they work better under pressure, but the results they get are often dampened by the stress and anxiety this practice brings.

- Issues: missed deadlines, ineffective scheduling, multitasking

**Distractor**

- Your heart's in the right place, but you're easily distracted. A random request from a colleague is as likely to catch your fleeting attention as is a 20-minute phone call from your proprietor.

- Issues: multitasking, missed deadlines, ineffective scheduling

**Underestimator**

- You estimate that handling a task will take you much less than it actually does — you rarely live up to your optimistic deadlines.

- Issues: missed deadlines, ineffective scheduling

**Firefighter**

- You try to tackle everything on your own, right now — you're constantly putting out "fires" left and right, and don't feel fulfilled unless you're working on 10 tasks at once, and feeling "busy". Once you're done with that, you simply ask: "What's next?" — which is a practice that will lead you to burnout, sooner or later.

- Issues: missed deadlines, skipping breaks, ineffective scheduling

**Perfectionist**

- You're similar to the procrastinator and distractor, but your inability to finish a task at least has a noble cause — you want everything to be perfect. You'll work overtime, and invest all your efforts into delivering a high-quality project — but you often don't know how to quit while you're ahead, so you may miss your deadlines and risk burnout.
- Issues: missed deadlines, skipping breaks

- All the issues listed alongside your time management styles can be solved, and all the necessary time management skills can be perfected, if you only choose the right time management techniques.

### **Meeting deadlines consistently.**

- Everyone in business knows how hard it is to keep up with multiple projects, especially when meeting deadlines is the ultimate goal. Every client wants a promptly completed project, despite the workload you may be accumulating or the number of your employees. 

- This will mean keeping motivation high and striving to accomplish all tasks in line with your project deadlines. Luckily, there are a few proven tips to help.

### **Why meeting deadlines is important**

- We might think that we would be thriving in a work environment without project deadlines hanging over our heads. But this kind of environment could become a problem for both the staff and the company in the long run. 

- Setting and meeting deadlines in the workplace is essential as it helps with time management and helps employees remain accountable for every task assigned to them. At the same time, deadlines reassure clients that the work will be done in time. 

- Here are the main benefits of meeting deadlines:
    · It proves your credibility and stature across the business
    · It encourages loyalty and respect among your stakeholders because work  is always delivered on time
    · It improves the productivity of your team so you can get more done in less time

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

### **How to meet deadlines at work** 

Here are 12 proven strategies on how to meet deadlines and save time:

1.  Create a timeline for the creative    department
2.  Define a deadline for production 
3.  Identify task dependencies
4.  Break down work into smaller tasks
5.  Prioritize tasks
6.  Add a buffer
7.  Define focus time
8.  Keep track of projects and deadlines
9.  Communicate with your co-workers
10. Make sure everyone is on the same page 
11. Don’t overcommit
12. Learn from previous mistakes
  
Deadlines are essential for creating a structure and ensuring each team member is accountable for the work they do. They are also necessary because only with deadlines can you make sure to adequately prioritize work, and that everyone stays productive.
