<!-- <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div> -->

 # 11. Effective use of technology

## **The Role of Technology in Customer Service: How to Use Tools to Improve Your Performance**

- A company’s customer service department is essential to dealing with the firm’s most crucial resource —the client. The customer support agents help maintain the company’s relationship with its clients, creating a sense of loyalty and boosting conversion rates. Without customer loyalty, businesses cannot achieve and sustain growth. Fortunately, technology has emerged to improve customer support, allowing companies to automate services and use resources to enhance customer experience.

- It is important to reiterate that technology is critical for practical customer support. As more businesses transition to e-commerce platforms, the influence of tech on customer service grows. Read on for valuable insights into the relationship between technology and customer service.

## **Technology Speeds Up Communication**
- One helpful way customer service agents benefit from technology is through more effective communication. According to experts, tech makes work more accessible by increasing the speed of interaction. For example, customers no longer need to wait or stay on hold when calling about services or products. Today, chatting with customer support agents is instantaneous, allowing companies to address customer issues as soon as they emerge.

- Evidence shows that most customers aren’t willing to wait more than two minutes before getting feedback on their requests. 13% of customers report being annoyed by customer service agencies that place them on hold. Thanks to SaaS customer support tech, clients can now use live chat and text options to reach support agents. It is much faster than sending an email and waiting for a response. Since tech allows multiple communication channels, interacting with customers is quicker and more convenient than ever.

## **Technology Increases Convenience**

- Another benefit of technology in customer support is that it increases customer convenience. We live in a fast-paced world where convenience is everything. Therefore, businesses should consider every element of the customer journey, ensuring the ride is intuitive and smooth. In addition, technology enhances the business’s preparedness by allowing more market research to understand customer needs better.

- Technology makes customer service convenient in many ways. For instance, it allows making browser features more intuitive on customer websites. It also allows companies to organize products and services differently in the store. As such, clients find what they need faster. Also, by offering fast, secure, and convenient payment modalities, tech makes purchases easier and saves customers considerable time. Cashless and one-touch payments are a few ways technology has made things convenient for customers.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

## **Technology Provides Options for Self-Service**

- Technology can also enhance customer experience by offering options for self-service. Customers want to make informed decisions, and technology allows the comparison of products and services. In addition, the clients can choose how they can interact with the company support departments, as organizations offer multiple platforms for interaction.

- It is important to note that the modern self-service device does more than just process payments. At retail points, shoppers can now use in-isle barcode scanners to get information about products and access inventories. Moreover, self-service improves customer experience by providing direct connections to experts. Users can find customer service reps immediately if they need assistance.

## **Technology Curates Tailored Marketing**

- Another importance of technology in business is that it allows for tailored and targeted marketing strategies. The cornerstone of effective customer service is ensuring customers are not inconvenienced. Companies looking to grow their marketing strategies can use technology to create targeted marketing campaigns, ensuring clients get what they need on time and tailored to their preferences. They can go through customer demographics and data on purchasing behavior to provide products and services that will offer value rather than overwhelm them.

## **Technology Normalizes Remote Work**

- Another way companies can use technology to improve customer service is through remote work. Evidence suggests that the future of customer service will push customers and service representatives online. It means greater flexibility for both parties, allowing improved satisfaction. Instead of being confined in restrictive call centers, customer service agents can work remotely, even from the comfort of their homes.

## **Technology Improves Communication Lines**

- Another way companies can use tech to enhance customer experience is by improving communication lines. Today’s customers are increasingly impatient and cannot wait in lines or remain on hold for long periods. They want to be able to contact customer support agents immediately and have multiple channels of reaching out. Thanks to technology customer service, companies can now interact with their clients through several platforms, including social media channels, live chat, phone calls, and email. The point is that a successful customer service department offers various interaction options in an omnichannel approach.

#### Key Takeaways

<ins>Technology is transforming</ins> customer service in fundamental ways. It allows agents to use their time more effectively and provide speedy and convenient support. Tech also connects businesses with high-quality representatives at lower costs. The bottom line is that incorporating technology into your customer service department is a win for both business and customers.
 
- Integrating CRM tools into customer service.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

### What is a CRM integration?

- CRM integration is the seamless connectivity between your customer relationship management (CRM) software and third-party applications. Integrations result in automated actions that expand the functionality of your software, eliminating the need to toggle back and forth between systems.

- Your CRM is not only essential for communicating with customers, but it should also create alignment and streamline communication within your company. A study from IDG found that 61% of IT executives reported that their companies use over 100 different software tools. That’s a lot of data in a lot of different places. CRM integration is essential for bridging the gaps among modern companies' various data points and tools.

- With integration, you can create a single source of truth with all the necessary functionality for getting stuff done and keeping teams on the same page.

#### Benefits of CRM Integration

- There are several benefits to integrating your CRM with the rest of your tech stack. An integrated CRM can be the central hub for all your business and customer data, ensuring your processes run smoothly. You can then create a 360-view of customer activity.

- See other benefits of CRM integration below.
  **1. Improved Efficiency**
   
   By integrating your CRM with other systems, you can streamline internal processes. For example, adding automation software can reduce the effort spent on manual tasks such as data entry.

  You’ll then have more time to GSD. (Get Stuff Done).

  **2. Enhanced Data Accuracy**

  CRM integrations can help ensure that data is accurate and up-to-date. How? CRM integration allows for the automatic syncing of data between your CRM and other systems. Accordingly, you can eliminate mismatched contact records or data silos that keep some teams in the dark.

  For example, you can integrate HubSpot’s CRM with Shopify, which allows you to track who is buying what on your site. By integrating HubSpot and Shopify, the purchase data from Shopify gets automatically synced to corresponding contact records in HubSpot without you having to think about it.

  **3. Better Customer Experiences**
   
   Integrating your CRM with other tools can provide customers with more personalized and timely experiences.

   If your CRM is integrated with your stack, you will always have a complete and up-to-date view of customer interactions, allowing you to personalize communications accordingly.

  4. Increased Sales
  With proper CRM integration, sales opportunities will never get lost in translation between systems. In addition, you can personalize marketing efforts without fear of inaccurate information. All this adds up to increased sales and revenue.

  1. Enhanced Collaboration
  CRM integration allows different teams and departments in your organization to access and share customer data, improving team communication and collaboration.

  1. Better Data Analysis
  An integrated CRM system provides valuable insights and analytics on customer behavior. With helpful information from all of your business systems summed in your CRM, you can create supercharged reports that will improve sales and marketing strategies and improve the customer experience.

### Why integrate customer service platforms with your CRM?

- Integrating a customer service platform with your CRM can increase efficiency and improve your customer experience by helping you share your data across platforms, automate customer service tasks, track customer satisfaction, and create personalized customer journeys.

- Read on to learn more about how to make the most of your CRM and customer service platform integration by taking advantage of these benefits.

### Sharing data across platforms

- One of the key benefits of integrating your CRM and customer service tools is having all your data in one place. 

- Integrating your CRM and customer support tools enables your support team to see all the data you have in your CRM about a contact when assisting that customer. Quick access to this customer data allows them to provide more personalized support.

- Integrations also enable your CRM to automatically log all of your customer service interactions in your CRM. You can then see all of your team’s interactions with a given customer in one place, including interactions through support, sales, and marketing.

- Storing all of your customer interaction data together in your CRM also enables you to review and analyze this data to uncover trends, customer pain points, product improvement ideas, and other valuable insights.

### Automating customer service tasks

- By connecting your CRM to customer service and support platforms, you can automate elements of your customer service processes. Through customer service integrations, your team can streamline various customer service tasks to improve response times and offer the right support to your customers at the right time.

### <ins>**How to automate customer service with a CRM**</ins>

- Customer service automation can significantly impact customer satisfaction and experience by saving time and effort. Here are a few ways you can automate your customer service efforts.

### *Use live chat and chatbots*

- Chatbots and live chat tools are incredibly useful for automating and streamlining online customer service. They can answer basic customer questions without your customer service team having to lift a finger.

- Rather than wait for an email response from your customer service team, chatbots can promptly help users and customers so your team can continue providing excellent service to high-value customers.

- Integrating your CRM with a chatbot tool enables it to automatically log chats in your customer timelines, so you can easily keep track of all the contact’s interactions with your company, including those with a chatbot. Your team will also have easy access to all of your CRM data about a customer if they take over the chat.

#### *Gather customer data through forms*

- When you integrate your CRM with online forms, your CRM can automatically log the information customers submit through your forms. So, if a customer submits a support request on your website, your team can access that information in your CRM along with all your other data about that customer.

- At Nutshell, we offer our own built-in forms tool as well as a simple method for connecting existing forms to Nutshell.

#### *Send automated emails*

- Customers appreciate knowing businesses are paying attention to them. With Nutshell, you can set up automated emails that send out to customers based on specific triggers, such as submitting a support request, purchasing a product, or making an appointment. 

- These emails enable you to respond to customers right away, confirming that their requests were received, ensuring them their requests are important to your business, and sharing helpful information more quickly.

### **Benefits of personalized customer journeys**
Personalized customer journeys offer a few unique benefits to your business that are tough to pass up, including:
- A seamless customer experience: Personalized customer journeys create a positive customer experience for people, seamlessly leading them through each phase of the customer journey. When you understand customer behavior, you can create a customer journey for them that feels natural and straightforward.

- Improved customer satisfaction: Personalized customer journeys make working with your business feel easy and hassle-free. Customers want that in a company, and when you can offer it to them, overall customer satisfaction improves.

- Increased customer loyalty: When you have a personalized customer journey in place that boosts customer satisfaction, you’ve got a higher chance of attracting and retaining loyal customers. Who doesn’t want to work with a business that doesn’t make you jump through hoops?
