<!-- <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div> -->

 # 12.  Conflict Resolution Skills

- Getting involved in conflicts can happen from time to time, but knowing how to handle those conflicts can be difficult, which is why it’s so important to have strong conflict resolution skills.

- How you handle a conflict with someone can make or break your relationship with them. When you’re dealing with a conflict in a professional setting, it becomes even more important to handle it correctly to ensure a positive and safe working environment. While it might be easier to put your guard up and get defensive at the first sight of a conflict, doing so can hinder your relationship with the other person. Knowing how to positively handle conflicts means you can resolve them in a much faster and more efficient manner.
- At a business, you interact with a wide range of people on a regular basis, so you have to expect conflicts to arise from time to time. No workplace is completely free of conflict, no matter how happy the employees may seem. But the best businesses don’t pride themselves on having any conflicts, they pride themselves on their conflict resolution skills.

### What is conflict resolution?

- Conflict resolution is the process that two or more parties use to find a cordial solution to a problem. Conflicts can occur between friends and family members, but also between coworkers, clients, and customers. In the workplace, having poor conflict resolution skills can reflect very negatively on your organization.

- Conflicts are natural in both personal and professional relationships, and you shouldn’t try to find a way to avoid conflicts. Instead, you should work on your conflict resolution skills. Having good conflict resolution skills means you can resolve a problem or dispute in a positive way and still maintain a healthy and happy relationship with the other party involved.

- Having poor conflict resolution skills is only going to make these inevitable situations so much harder for you. Not only will it take longer to resolve a dispute, but also it can result in a larger argument that could have a significant impact on the relationship between the two parties.

### Why is conflict resolution important?

- Conflict resolution is crucial for both the workplace and client relationships. Conflict resolution brings people together to figure out a solution to a problem rather than pulling them apart. The goal of a workplace is to create an inclusive environment of people that know how to manage and limit conflicts. You can’t expect to have a conflict-free workplace, so instead, you should aim to ensure everyone has the skills to handle conflicts in a professional manner.

- Conflict resolution also means that issues will get resolved much faster, which can lead to greater efficiency in the workplace. Rather than dwelling on an issue for hours or even days, you can resolve the issue quickly and effectively so everyone can get back to work.

- A poorly handled conflict can lose your business time and money, while conflict resolution can improve your colleague relationships, employee performance, and retention rates. Knowing how to resolve conflicts with clients can also help improve client retention and maintain strong brand identity and trustworthiness.

- Conflict resolution also builds teamwork, as it brings people together to resolve an issue. When you’re able to put aside your differences and come together to reach a conclusion that works for everyone, it shows a lot of strength. It shows that you care more about resolving the issue than being right in the situation. Conflict resolution is essential in order to build strong working relationships that are based on mutual respect and trust.

- Overall, conflict resolution creates a positive and inviting company culture so that your employees feel respected. No one wants to go into their office every day worrying about what kind of argument they’re going to get into that day and how it might escalate. Conflict resolution creates a positive work environment that is based on communication and trust, so you can quickly resolve conflicts and move on with your day.

### 5 important conflict resolution skills

- Conflict resolution doesn’t come easily to everyone. Some people naturally default to unhealthy responses, even if it’s not what they intend to say. This is why it’s crucial to know important conflict resolution skills. Instead of handling a situation with anger and resentment, conflict resolution skills teach you to respond in a calm and non-defensive manner.

- The next time you find yourself in a dispute with someone at work, be sure to use your conflict resolution skills. Here is how to improve conflict resolution skills so you can have more positive and productive conservations:

## Managing Conflict
 
<ins>*Accept conflict.*</ins> Remember that conflict is natural and happens in every ongoing relationship. Since conflict is unavoidable we must learn to manage it. Conflict is a sign of a need for change and an opportunity for growth, new understanding, and improved communication. Conflict can not be resolved unless it is addressed with the appropriate individual(s).

<ins>*Be a calming agent.*</ins> Regardless of whether you are being a sounding board for a friend or you are dealing with your own conflict, your response to the conflict can escalate or decrease the intensity of the problem. To be calming, provide an objective or neutral point of view. Help plan how you are going to work with the other party to achieve resolution.

<ins>*Listen actively.*</ins> Work through how you feel, what the specific problem is and what impact it is having on you. Use I -based statements to help do this (see formula below).

- I feel (strongest feeling)

- When you (objective description of the behavior)

- Because (specific impact or consequences)

- I would like (what you want the person to do in the future to prevent the problem)


<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

<ins>*Analyze the conflict.*</ins> This will help clarify the specific problem. Some questions that you may ask are:

- What triggered the conflict?

- Who are you angry with?

- What are you not getting that you want?

- What are you afraid of losing?

- Is your conflict/anger accurate or over exaggerated?

- How can your conflict be resolved?

<ins>*Model neutral language.*</ins> When people are in conflict they use inflammatory language such as profanity, name calling, and exaggerations that escalate the conflict. Restate inflammatory language in a more objective way to help make the information less emotionally laden and more useful for future discussions.

<ins*>Separate the person from the problem.*</ins> View the problem as a specific behavior or set of circumstances rather than attributing negative feelings to the whole person. This approach makes the problem more manageable and hopeful than deciding you “can’t stand” this person any longer.

<ins>*Work together.*</ins> This requires that each person stop placing blame and take ownership of the problem. Make a commitment to work together and listen to each other to solve the conflict.

<ins>*Agree to disagree.*</ins> Each person has a unique point of view and rarely agrees on every detail. Being right is not what is important. When managing conflict, seeking the “truth” can trap you rather than set you free. For example, consider the differing testimony of witnesses that all see the same car accident. Truth is relative to the person’s point of view.

<ins>*Focus on the future.*</ins> In conflict we tend to remember every single thing that ever bothered us about that person. People in conflict need to vent about the past but they often dwell on the past. Often the best way to take ownership of the problem is to recognize that regardless of the past, you need to create a plan to address the present conflict and those that may arise in the future.

<ins>*“Move past positions.”*</ins> A position is the desired outcome of a conflict. Often the position is “I need a new roommate” or “This person is impossible to live with.” Positions are not negotiable and result in impasse. To resolve conflict, each person has to “move past positions.”

<ins>*Share your interests.*</ins> To solve interpersonal conflict, all parties must talk about their interests or the WHYs behind their positions. They must share their true interests and work together to find a solution that satisfies those interests. Common interests for students are to sleep, study, entertain and relax in a comfortable atmosphere. Often their interests are more intangible such as respect, belonging, friendship, and fun. When individuals have differing lifestyles, values, and schedules the need to discuss their differences is critical in managing conflict. You must develop a balanced plan of give and take that satisfies everyone’s interests.

<ins>*Be creative.*</ins> Finding a resolution to the problem that satisfies everyone requires creativity and hard work. Be careful not to give in simply to avoid conflict or maintain harmony. Agreements reached too early usually do not last. Generate silly options to begin thinking “outside of the box” of original positions.

<ins>*Be specific.*</ins> When problem solving be very specific. For example if you are using a roommate agreement to facilitate the discussion make sure that everyone fully understands each point that is written down. Clarify ambiguous terms that each person may interpret differently.

<ins>*Maintain confidentiality.*</ins> Encourage others who are in conflict to deal directly with the person they are in conflict with. Avoiding the conflict and venting to others tends to escalate the conflict and fuels the rumor mill. If rumors are already part of the conflict, encourage them to work out a plan to put an end to the gossip. Do your part to quell rumors.

### 5 conflict resolution strategies:
Different people use different methods to resolve conflict, depending on their personalities and preferences. The five most common strategies, known as the (Kenneth) Thomas-(Ralph) Kilmann model,  used to resolve conflicts in the workplace include
 
 **1. Avoiding**

  This method involves simply ignoring that there may be a conflict. People tend to avoid conflict when they don’t want to engage in it. Avoiding allows them to ignore that there is a problem.

  There are situations when avoiding conflict can be an appropriate response, such as when there is no clear solution or a frustrated party needs time to calm down before confrontation. However, avoidance can require more effort than merely facing the problem and can cause friction between the disagreeing parties. When confict is avoided, nothing is resolved.

  **2. Competing**
    Competing is an uncooperative, overly assertive method used by people who insist on winning the dispute at all costs. It’s known as a win-lose strategy. This method is not often identified as bringing satisfactory resolutions, as it doesn’t allow for collaborative problem-solving.

  

**3. Accommodating**

This strategy, also known as smoothing, involves one party acquiescing, giving the opposing party exactly what it needs to resolve the problem. This method allows you to resolve a problem in the short-term while working toward a long-term solution.

In some cases, accommodating can be an appropriate resolution to a conflict. For example, if your opinion on the matter is not very strong, it is often easier to comply. 


**4. Collaborating**

Like the compromising method, collaboration involves working with the other party to find a mutually agreeable solution to a problem. It’s known as a win-win strategy. For example, a salesperson and client may work together to negotiate contract terms until both parties find it agreeable.

**5. Compromising**

This strategy, also known as reconciling, seeks a mutual agreement to settle a dispute. It’s known as a lose-lose strategy since both parties willingly forfeit some of their needs in the interest of reaching an agreement. This can be a quick way to resolve a conflict without it becoming a bigger issue. Compromise can also be used as a temporary method to avoid conflict until the parties involved can implement a more permanent solution.

It is appropriate to compromise when it would not be possible to make both sides completely happy while still moving forward.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

**13 de-escalation techniques to use in customer service**

As a customer support agent, using de-escalation techniques can help you maintain respectful troubleshooting conversations with clients and enhance the productiveness of your work. It's important that customers have a positive experience, and while supporting clients with high-level concerns and emotional responses can be challenging work, de-escalation techniques may help streamline your processes and help you address complaints effectively. Here are 13 de-escalation techniques to employ that may help keep clients calm and satisfied as you try to support them:

**1. Stay confident**
   
  As you move through your conversation with a dissatisfied customer, you should try to stay confident in your abilities to resolve their problems. When you're empowered and portray strength as a customer support agent, it's more likely that a customer will respect your boundaries and act accordingly.

**2. Script your response**

  If you know that you're likely to come across a challenging customer interaction in your role at some point, you may consider preparing for such instances by scripting your response. By doing so, you can avoid improvising your strategy for de-escalation and conflict resolution. To script your response, you can practice responding to different customer concerns that you anticipate coming across in your work.

  You might even consider practicing these conversations with a trusted friend or colleague to see how your script works in a real-life dialogue. Not only will rehearsing your response help you remain confident in your abilities to assist such customers, but having a script handy can help you maintain a steady tone even when customers express their frustration.

**3. Listen actively**

  In many cases, customers contact support agents to express their frustrations, vent about concerns and find solutions to challenging situations—meaning that they're looking for somebody to listen to and help them. In order to help your customers feel heard during your conversations, try to practice active listening strategies as they recount their experiences. Without interrupting customers as they speak, acknowledge their concerns, ask questions to clarify details about their experiences and use validating language.

  If you're peaking with a customer in person, using appropriate non-verbal cues can also help show that you're listening to their concerns carefully. You should try to maintain eye contact, keep your arms uncrossed and nod as they speak. Listening to customers patiently can help them calm down and provide you with key details about their experiences that may influence how you can solve their problems.

**4. Mirror their complaint**
  
  While you actively listen to a customer's complaints, validate their concerns and try to identify solutions that satisfy them, you want to make sure you understand their concerns fully. In order to do this, you should mirror a customer's complaint by repeating how they describe their experiences and what frustrations they've shared with you. Not only will this help you with navigating problem-solving processes, but it will help customers feel heard and understood as you attempt to support them. This is a key element to de-escalating challenging customer support conversations.

**5. Stay calm** 

  When customers come to you for support, they may express emotions of frustration, irritability or anger. This can be challenging to manage, but it's important to remember that customers aren't upset with you—rather, they're dissatisfied with a particular product or service your company provides.

  Therefore, when managing conversations with emotional customers, you should try your best to avoid taking their complaints personally and remain calm overall. Leaving your emotions out of the conversation, speaking objectively and maintaining a placid tone can help you act as a calming force while handling dissatisfied customers. This will give you the ability to get past their emotions and uncover the root problem causing their concerns.

**6. Identify the root cause**

  When customers call and express their frustration with a product or service, it's not always immediately clear what originally made the customer experience dissatisfaction. Customers may obscure the root cause behind their dissatisfaction through complaining about other factors. For example, a customer may have particularly high expectations for a product due to an advertisement they saw. If the product doesn't live up to those promises, the customer may decide to call for support and demand a replacement product or refund.

  While they're upset about the product's inability to fulfill the promises made in the advertisement, they may instead complain about the company's inability to provide a replacement or refund. As a customer support agent, it's your responsibility to investigate customer complaints deeply and identify the root cause so that you can help resolve such concerns in the best way possible. You can do this by asking specific and targeted questions about the customer's experiences with the product.

**7. Break the problem down**

  If a customer comes to you with a particularly complex or multifaceted problem, you can try to de-escalate their frustrations by breaking the problem down into more manageable portions. Since smaller problems are easier to tackle, you can address these portions one-by-one and make tangible progress in resolving the customer's concerns. If a customer sees that you're working diligently in coming up with practical solutions to the larger issue they presented, they may take a step back and try to approach the support conversation with respect from that point out.

  Even if a customer doesn't shift their tone as you work through their issues, this strategy can help you be more efficient in your support processes overall. With this, you can manage challenging problems that may have otherwise been time-consuming within a shorter time span. Therefore, breaking the problem down can help you effectively solve a customer's problems expeditiously and may encourage customers to treat you with civility.

**8. Offer sympathy**

  While customers typically approach customer support agents in order to resolve their problems, they may also do so as they seek validation of their frustrations. Some customers want support agents to confirm that their frustrations are justifiable—and while this isn't always the case, it's your duty to maintain a validating facade and help customers feel heard. With this, you should try to sympathize with customer concerns and somehow offer validation.

  You might consider using affirming statements like "I totally understand how this experience has been frustrating for you. Let's try to work together to find a solution to your concerns," or "That sounds like a dissatisfying experience. I'm going to do my best to help you resolve this issue." These efforts may help customers acknowledge your reasonability as you attempt to support them. When customers feel understood by support agents, they're more likely to treat said agents with consideration.

**9. Be realistic**

  As a customer support agent, it's incredibly important that you remain realistic in your abilities to resolve a customer's problems or provide them with solutions they request. You should avoid making promises that you may not be able to keep. Rather, try to present solutions you know are feasible—even if these solutions aren't exactly what a customer wants, it's better for you to be honest in the long term. In situations like this, make sure that you tell customers you're trying to identify a solution, but some solutions may lie outside of your control.

  If customers understand that you're doing all that you can to address a problem and find a solution, they will usually appreciate your efforts, even if they don't get exactly what they want in the end. While it's your responsibility to help maintain customer satisfaction, there are only so many tactics you have at your disposal to do so—keep this in mind as you navigate these conversations.

**10.  Avoid putting customers on hold**

  When customers call support centers, companies often route them through lengthy automatic voice messages. They may experience wait times and sometimes, they're even directed to the wrong department. This causes them to be put on hold repeatedly as they wait for agents to become available or for agents to transfer them from department to department. This can be especially frustrating for customers who feel that they're already being inconvenienced through their dissatisfaction with a product or service. Therefore, you should try to avoid putting customers on hold to avoid increased challenges, especially if they're already expressing negative emotions about their experience.

**11.  Narrate your problem-solving processes**

  Putting customers on hold may exacerbate their negative feelings and make it more challenging for you to address their concerns. Instead, talk to them as you research solutions to their issues—tell them the exact steps you're taking to find a resolution. If you need to put a customer on hold at any point to speak to a supervisor or colleague about the solution, ask them politely whether they would mind holding briefly. This narration can help customers recognize your careful efforts as you attempt to streamline the support process.

**12.  Apologize**

  Apologies are one of the most underrated de-escalation techniques for handling frustrated and emotional customers. While you may want to avoid admitting fault when a customer complains, you should try to express your apologies that the customer is experiencing an issue in the first place. You can do this by offering a simple and straightforward apology, like "I'm so sorry to hear that this has been your experience with our services. We strive for customer satisfaction with all of our products and services—let's see what solution we can come up with so you don't have to go through this again."

  This type of apology can help customers feel understood in their dissatisfaction and increase customer retention. With this effort, customers may be more likely to return to a company and engage with their products, even if they haven't been successful in the past.

**13.  Offer recompense**

  As you wrap up your conversation with a dissatisfied customer, try to offer them recompense to make up for their frustrating experience. If you can, offer a refund, voucher or options that show your company appreciates their business. This is a retention strategy that can help customers leave your conversation feeling supported and like you adequately addressed their concerns.
