<!-- <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div> -->
 
 # 14.Handling customer inquires

### What are customer complaints, really?

- Customer complaints are often a sign that there's a disconnect between what customers expected and what you delivered. Sometimes that disconnect is caused by a customer's unreasonable expectations or incorrect assumptions. Other times, it's caused by something your company is doing wrong.

- A customer complaint might be the result of your marketing copy leading them to believe something incorrect about your product/service — or of your user experience setting customers up for failure. Or it could reflect a problem that's happening outside of your direct control (e.g., third-party shipping issues).

- The only way to find out is to give credence to customer complaints to determine if they contain genuinely useful feedback.

### A 5-step process for handling customer complaints

- To uncover the reason you received a complaint from a customer and solve the problem in order to retain that customer, use this five-step process for handling customer complaints.

<ins>**Step 1: Dig deeper by asking the right questions**</ins>

Complaints — even angry ones — can contain insights, and it’s your job to seek out the point of friction. Socratic questioning can help you get to the source of the issue.

Ask your customer questions like:

· What do you mean by...?
· Could you provide an example?
· Could you expand on that point further?

And ask yourself questions like:

· What other information do I need?
· What am I assuming here?
· Why is this complaint important?

- Often, complaints are the result of problems that need to be solved. Asking the right questions helps you get to the root of the complaint, figure out if there's a way to resolve the issue, and determine if the complaint contains genuinely useful feedback.

- If you determine that you aren't the right person to help with the customer's complaint and need to transfer them to someone who can, make sure to explain why. This can be as simple as saying, "I’m going to set you up with our specialist who will get that squared away for you right away."

<ins>**Step 2: Identify the type of customer you're dealing with**</ins>

- A study from the University of Florida found that when dealing with customer complaints, you may run into one of the following types of customers, each "motivated by different beliefs, attitudes, and needs":
  
*· Customers who aren't shy about letting you know they're upset.* When responding, avoid mirroring their confrontational behavior; instead, react with firm politeness.

*· Customers who pay well and demand premium support for it.* When responding, avoid excuses and just get to the solution. Consider creating a VIP folder and workflow to make it easy to identify and respond to their complaints.

*· Customers who contact you frequently. Stay patient and avoid coming across as frustrated when responding to these customers.* When satisfied, they often become repeat customers and advocates for your company.

*· Customers who don't want to complain and may just take their business elsewhere without ever letting you know there was a problem.* You'll have to actively reach out to these customers to solicit and resolve their complaints; otherwise, you may never hear their feedback.
These are broad descriptions and, of course, your customers will present a more complex mixture of motivations and behaviors, but being aware of different persona types can help you respond most appropriately to the real person you are assisting.

<ins>**Step 3: Respond to the customer quickly**</ins>

- When it comes to unhappy customers, a speedy response goes from being a nice-to-have to a necessity. Complaints are best resolved as soon as possible.

- A customer leaving a feature request won’t mind at all if it takes you a day to respond, but customers who are in a “pulling my hair out” situation want a resolution yesterday. Make responding to them a priority.

- It can be useful to set up a folder that's separate from the main support queue where you can filter less-than-ecstatic messages. Here, the team can see immediately which emails are from customers who need help right away.

</ins>**Step 4: Present a solution, and verify that the problem is solved**</ins>

After you've identified the root cause of the customer's complaint, found a solution, and sent that solution to the customer, it's important to verify that the solution you proposed actually solved the problem. There are a couple of ways to do this:

· If you can't verify that the solution is working, add this line to the end of your communication: "Please let me know if there's anything else I can do for you. I'm happy to help!"

· Verify that the solution is working, then reply with: "I've tested this myself and it all appears to be working as expected, which you can see here: (include screenshot). But please let me know if you're still running into issues."

- In some cases, it may even be worth reaching back out to the customer after a few days have passed to make sure that everything is resolved.
  
- You may also want to consider monitoring any satisfaction ratings you receive on the conversation in your customer service software. Negative feedback may be a sign that there are still issues that need to be addressed (though there will be times that you've done everything you can do and the customer will still leave upset).

<ins>**Step 5: Log the complaint so you can track trends**</ins>

- If you've gotten one complaint from one customer about one specific issue over the last 10 years, that issue might not be worth addressing. But if you're getting multiple messages from multiple customers who all shared the same complaint, that's the beginning of a narrative.

- To identify high-volume complaints, you'll need a system for tracking them. At Help Scout, we use the Help Scout + Jira integration to track customer complaints so we can capture them, monitor how often we're hearing recurring concerns, and follow up with each customer directly when the issue has been resolved.

- Whatever system you use, the key is to make it easy to capture meaningful complaints and track the volume of customers who are bringing up similar or identical issues.

### How to handle negativity as a support professional

- Handling customer complaints is just par for the course for support professionals, but that doesn't mean it won't take a toll on you emotionally from time to time.

- So in addition to providing you with a process for handling customer complaints, we wanted to share these tips from Jeremey DuVall, Support Engineer at WordPress VIP, on how to keep yourself from feeling down on days when there's lots of negativity in the queue.

### Rehearse objections ahead of time

- By rehearsing potential objections ahead of time, you can prepare before real-life negative interactions occur. Before launching a new product or feature, think about things that might attract polarizing opinions. This has three purposes:
  
 *· Tackle negativity —* First, tackle negativity to force everyone to confront the fact that some customers might not like the change you're making. Addressing that ahead of time prevents anyone from looking at the situation with rose-colored glasses.

*· Discuss rationale —* Second, discuss the rationale for the change. If the decision to make a change was well-thought-out and backed by data, you can move forward knowing you made the right decision, even if it ruffles some customers' feathers.

*· Rehearse answers —* Lastly, rehearse your answers and get everyone on the same page. It’s not about creating support robots who copy and paste the same replies to customers; it’s about creating a consistent support experience for customers.

### <ins>Balance negativity</ins>

- In To Sell Is Human, Daniel H. Pink discusses how door-to-door salespeople experience “no” a heck of a lot. How do you keep your head up amongst that level of negativity?

- Pink points to research on positivity ratios — the number of positive interactions to negative ones. If the ratio is high (say, 10:1), you’ll think nothing can go wrong (not necessarily realistic). A ratio of 1:1 is too pessimistic; the glass is half empty. A ratio of 3:1 is just about right.

- While we don’t need to focus too specifically on the exact ratio, we do need to have tools in place to boost positivity when we feel ourselves slipping down the negativity slope. Here are some ideas:
  



**· Happy file:** Create a happy file just for yourself. In that file, keep amazing interactions you've had with customers and conversations that always put a smile on your face. When you feel down during the day, looking through the file is a quick way to pick yourself back up.

**· Team kudos:** At the end of every month, have one person read through all the awesome comments from customers and pick out the best one for each person. If you forget about how awesome your teammates are, this is an easy, quick reminder.

**· Happiness #hugs:** Aggregate awesome comments from your customers and post them to a company-wide feed with the hashtag #hugs. When you’re having a bad day, it’s easy to view the tag feed and get a huge boost.

### Master explanatory style

- We can explain negative interactions after the fact in a couple of ways. The feedback is either "permanent, pervasive, and personal," or "temporary, specific, and external."
  
- When you view a negative interaction as permanent (not going away), pervasive (everyone feels this way), and personal (there’s a part of me that plays into this), you feel like you have little control over your environment. Things are happening to you.

- The alternative to “permanent, pervasive, and personal” is “temporary, specific, and external.” In this light, negative interactions become more manageable and actionable.
  
- First, negative interactions probably aren’t the norm (if they are, you’re doing something wrong). Second, negative feedback is usually specific to a certain product or thing. Finally, it’s external. It’s generally not about you or anything you are doing.

- How do you put this into practice? Conduct personal reviews of negative feedback every so often to do the following:
  
 · Look for areas where you could have improved in the interaction (details you missed, ways you could have improved the service, etc.).

 · Practice self-talk so these interactions don’t feel personal. This practice prepares you to stomach any waves of negativity you might run into when navigating the queue.

#### How to handle customer complaints the right way

- Some people aren’t going to like what you build. That’s the cost of shipping things out into the world. If your product is great enough, there’s a good chance you’ll hear polarized opinions about it.

- But by preparing ahead of time, maintaining appropriate positivity ratios, and framing feedback as temporary, specific, and external, you can arm yourself with ways to handle the negativity so you can address customer complaints efficiently and use them to create loyal customers.

### The importance of responding to customer inquiries

#### Retains more customers

- Many customers who make inquiries could be on the verge of leaving your business. By getting in touch, they are giving you the chance to salvage the situation and win back their loyalty. If a company’s customer service is excellent, 78% of customers will do business with them again after a mistake. 

- Responding effectively and quickly to customer inquiries shows that you value your customer’s time, and are willing to go the extra mile to make things right. Customers aren’t going to wait around for a long time for your business to get back to them, and they want an answer yesterday. 

**Dealing with your customer’s inquiries generates loyalty to your business as customers know you will look after their interests, and helps with customer retention.** 


### Generates positive word-of-mouth


- 90% of customers trust suggestions from family and friends, and 70% trust consumer reviews. When you treat your customers well through effectively handling their inquiries, they have a positive brand experience which they then share with people they know and online. 

- This means that companies can acquire new customers through satisfied customers who generate referrals. It’s well worth your business’s time to invest in customer service and respond to customer inquiries quickly and effectively. It helps you avoid bad word of mouth such as online reviews which deter potential customers. 
  
**When you help customers with their inquiries, you give them more reasons to recommend your brand.** 

### Preserves your brand’s reputation


- When something has gone wrong, this has the potential to leave a black mark on the reputation of your business. Customers are disappointed and you have not created the experience you led them to expect. 

- Of course, mistakes are inevitable but effectively dealing with customer inquiries means you can preserve your brand’s reputation. You can make apologies and offer compensation, thereby salvaging your business in the eyes of existing and potential customers. 

**After one bad experience, 80% of customers say they would rather do business with a competitor. Making it up to these customers is crucial if you don’t want to lose money and customers.** 


### Provides feedback about your business

- When you respond to customer inquiries you can take advantage of a valuable source of feedback about your business. For example, customers may regularly inquire about whether your business offers a certain type of service. You can use this inquiry to understand what customers want and whether you should consider expanding your offering, or at the very least offer more detailed customer information on your website. 

- There is always something you can learn from your customer inquiries. Naturally, you can create processes in your customer support team where they can report common inquiries so your business can tackle the root of the problem. 

**Any time customers volunteer their opinion about your brand is an opportunity for your business to learn how it can be better.**


### Allows you to create a better customer experience

- 80% of customers say the experience a company provides is just as important as the products and services. When you respond effectively to your customer inquiries, you can create a more positive experience for your customers who find it easy and intuitive to get in touch. You don’t keep customers waiting or make them feel like their inquiry is a burden on your support team. 

- You can’t provide a great experience if you focus only on the product, without taking the service into account. It’s those interactions that customers have with your representatives which are most memorable and earn their loyalty to your brand. 

**A better customer experience can generate more profits for your business through customers who are willing to spend more.** 

### How to efficiently handle customer inquiries

#### Develop clear policies

- When you have a customer service policy in place your agents are clear on how to handle customers. They know what to do when a complaint comes in and how the business wishes to deal with it. They can become a better representative of your brand and customers can benefit from a consistent experience. 

- Customer service reps who can follow simple guidelines on how to interact with customers are better placed to offer excellent customer service. They are more accountable to your business and can offer a consistent experience due to having a written code of conduct. 

**When you make your customer service policies explicit this raises the standard of service your agents are able to offer.** 

### **Define an escalation process**

- There will always be those times that a customer inquiry cannot be dealt with by a frontline agent. They may not have the experience, the inquiry might be too technical , or it might require the authorisation of a manager. Having a clear escalation process in place means these types of inquiries can be dealt with efficiently. 

- Of course, it’s important to keep this process almost invisible to customers. Never should they have to repeat information in order to get their problem solved. Your customer support software should record all the necessary details in order to get a problem escalated to the right person. 

### Continuously train your agents

- It’s a good idea to keep training your agents so they are always at the top of their game when it comes to dealing with customer calls. After all, your agents are the representatives of your brand and responsible for creating a good impression with your customers. 

- Customer service agents can always benefit from learning new customer service skills which allow them to better help your customers. Training topics can range from problem-solving, to active listening, to how to deal with angry customers. 

**Well-trained agents are more competent and are more easily able to make your customers happy.** 

### Deflect inquiries with self-service

- You’ll be able to more efficiently handle more customer inquiries if you deflect some tickets using self-service resources. For example, a self-service customer knowledge base can offer answers to common customer inquiries such as how to set up your product and how to troubleshoot typical problems. 

- When you deflect more queries with self-service, your agents have more time to devote to the more complex inquiries. You can scale your service team to support a growing customer base without the need to hire more agents. 

**You can raise the morale of your customer service agents when they aren’t dealing with too many repetitive inquiries.** 

### Place inquiries into categories

- When you place your inquiries into categories you are more able to deal with related queries. Inquiries that are labeled with the same category can be assigned to the same agent to deal with to enhance efficiency. 

- For example, you might be getting inquiries all relating to customer’s dissatisfaction with a particular product. This lets your team know there is something wrong with the product and you might 
want to proactively offer a refund to all customers who have bought it. 


**You can use tags in Keeping for an easy way to add context to a ticket or keep track of certain topics in your mailbox. Even though Keeping works in Gmail, tags are independent from Gmail’s own label system.**
### Track KPIs for better performance


- You won’t be able to improve the way your team handles customer inquiries if you don’t keep track of key help desk metrics that help you analyze performance. Important metrics you can track are first contact resolution, first response time, to ticket closure rate. 

- When you keep an eye on these metrics you’ll be able to see where your team is excelling and where they need help. For example, if the first response time of one of your agents is creeping up, this might be a sign they are being assigned too many customer inquiries and they need more help. 

**Aside from customer feedback, KPIs give you insight into whether you are effectively dealing with customer inqquiries.**

## 6 types of customer inquiries

### 1. Complaints
Customers submit complaints when they are not happy with your service or something has gone wrong. Complaints don’t necessarily have to be from angry customers but most customers with complaints will expect some kind of reparation. Customer complaints need to be dealt with very quickly and with the utmost care and conscientiousness. 

2. Sales inquiries
Sales inquiries are fairly routine inquiries from customers who want to learn more about your products and services. In this case, they will often turn to your service team for advice, who can recommend products to customers or provide more information about your offering. 

3. Feature requests
If your company sells software then you may often get ideas from customers who want to suggest feature requests. These are requests for features that customers would like to see which they think would add value to the product. It’s important to log these features and consider incorporating them into your product roadmap. 

4. Technical support
Companies with technical products often receive customer inquiries from customers who need help with troubleshooting problems. These could be common glitches with the software or support for when things go seriously wrong. You’ll need a trained technical support team to help these customers. 

5. Returns and refunds
Sadly there will always be those times when the product just wasn’t suitable for the customer. When this happens the customer is likely to contact you with a returns or refund inquiry. Whether you offer this to them depends on your own policy and whether the customer qualifies. 

6. Customer feedback
Sometimes customers just want to offer their feedback about your brand, and you’ll want to have a system in place to capture these types of inquiries. Spontaneous customer feedback is very valuable and you should thank your customers for taking the time to submit feedback. 


## <ins>Wrapping up</ins>

Businesses who effectively deal with their customer inquiries will enjoy a better brand reputation and more loyal and satisfied customers. It’s shocking to think that many businesses just leave their customer inquiries hanging and never provide a response. There’s nothing worse than contacting a business for help and feeling ignored, or receiving a brusque and unhelpful response. 

**Every customer inquiry is important and requires a well-crafted, thoughtful reply.** 

Dealing with your customer inquiries leads to many benefits such as retaining more customers and generating positive word-of-mouth. Your business can’t afford to neglect its customers if it wants to remain competitive and prevent customers from defecting to its rivals. 

## <ins>Complaints handling policy</ins>

Develop a complaints handling policy. It should include reassuring customers that you value their feedback and you are committed to resolving their issues in a fair, timely and efficient manner.

It should also:
- explain how customers can make a formal complaint.
  
- identify the steps you will take in discussing, addressing and resolving complaints.

- indicate some of the solutions you offer to resolve complaints.

- inform customers about your commitment to continuous improvement.
