<!-- <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div> -->

# 9. Problem Solving frameworks

- Problem-solving competency is a central objective within the educational programmes of many countries. The acquisition of increased levels of problem-solving competency provides a basis for future learning, for effective participation in society and for conducting personal activities. Citizens need to be able to apply what they have learnt to new situations. The study of individuals’ problem-solving strengths provides a window into their capabilities to employ basic thinking and other general cognitive approaches to confronting challenges in life

- Problem-solving competency is an individual’s capacity to engage in cognitive processing to understand and resolve problem situations where a method of solution is not immediately obvious. It includes the willingness to engage with such situations in order to achieve one’s potential as a constructive and reflective citizen.

- Problem solving is the process of defining a problem, identifying its root cause, prioritizing and selecting potential solutions, and implementing the chosen solution.

- There’s no one-size-fits-all problem-solving process. Often, it’s a unique methodology that aligns your short- and long-term objectives with the resources at your disposal. Nonetheless, many paradigms center problem solving as a pathway for achieving one’s goals faster and smarter. 

- One example is the Six Sigma framework, which emphasizes eliminating errors and refining the customer experience, thereby improving business outcomes. Developed originally by Motorola, the Six Sigma process identifies problems from the perspective of customer satisfaction and improving product delivery

### **How to Solve Problems**

**1. Precisely Identify Problems**

 - As obvious as it seems, identifying the problem is the first step in the problem-solving process. Pinpointing a problem at the beginning of the process will guide your research, collaboration, and solutions in the right direction. 

 - At this stage, your task is to identify the scope and substance of the problem. Ask yourself a series of questions: 

   What’s the problem? 
   How many subsets of issues are underneath this problem? 

   What subject areas, departments of work, or functions of business can best define this problem? 

 - Although some problems are naturally large in scope, precision is key. Write out the problems as statements in planning sheets. Should information or feedback during a later step alter the scope of your problem, revise the statements. 

 - Framing the problem at this stage will help you stay focused if distractions come up in later stages. Furthermore, how you frame a problem will aid your search for a solution. A strategy of building Lean success, for instance, will emphasize identifying and improving upon inefficient systems. 

**2. Collect Information and Plan**

 - The second step is to collect information and plan the brainstorming process. This is another foundational step to road mapping your problem-solving process. Data, after all, is useful in identifying the scope and substance of your problems. 

 - Collecting information on the exact details of the problem, however, is done to narrow the brainstorming portion to help you evaluate the outcomes later. Don’t overwhelm yourself with unnecessary information — use the problem statements that you identified in step one as a north star in your research process. 

 - This stage should also include some planning. Ask yourself:

   - What parties will ultimately decide a solution? 

   - Whose voices and ideas should be heard in the brainstorming process? 

   - What resources are at your disposal for implementing a solution? 

 - Establish a plan and timeline for steps 3-5. 

**3. Brainstorm Solutions**

 - Brainstorming solutions is the bread and butter of the problem-solving process. At this stage, focus on generating creative ideas. As long as the solution directly addresses the problem statements and achieves your goals, don’t immediately rule it out. Moreover, solutions are rarely a one-step answer and are more like a roadmap with a set of actions. As you brainstorm ideas, map out these solutions visually and include any relevant factors such as costs involved, action steps, and involved parties. 

**4. Decide and Implement**

 - The most critical stage is selecting a solution. Easier said than done. Consider the criteria that has arisen in previous steps as you decide on a solution that meets your needs. 

 - Once you select a course of action, implement it. 

- Practicing due diligence in earlier stages of the process will ensure that your chosen course of action has been evaluated from all angles. Often, efficient implementation requires us to act correctly and successfully the first time, rather than being hurried and sloppy. Further compilations will create more problems, bringing you back to step 1. 

**5. Evaluate**

 - Exercise humility and evaluate your solution honestly. Did you achieve the results you hoped for? What would you do differently next time? 

 - As some experts note, formulating feedback channels into your evaluation helps solidify future success. A framework like Lean success, for example, will use certain key performance indicators (KPIs) like quality, delivery success, reducing errors, and more. Establish metrics aligned with company goals to assess your solutions.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

### Problem solving tools

 - Problem-solving tools refer to strategies that can help determine the cause of a problem and identify the best solutions available. The first step in addressing an issue at work is to outline your objectives. Once you establish the cause, you can isolate variables that can help contribute to a potential solution. For example, if a customer calls you to explain the product they purchased isn't working, you might ask them about the product, how they used it, or whether it worked initially to outline important starting variables.

 - The next steps often involve you and your colleagues discussing potential solutions. Most tools you might use include a collaborative brainstorming element, which can help you come up with potential solutions more quickly. Once you decide on the most viable solution, you can start addressing each element of the problem in steps. Make sure you evaluate the success of the solution by following up with a customer or monitoring the problem-solving procedure. This method can help you determine how effective the solution was so you can decide on when it would be appropriate to use in the future.

### <ins>**Types of problem-solving tools**</ins>

**Linear thinking**

 - Linear thinking refers to the process of defining the cause of the problem and finding a solution by asking a series of questions. You can start by identifying the problem and writing it down. To diagnose the cause of the problem, you can ask questions relevant to when the problem started, what products or services were involved, what methods were used to troubleshoot the issue, and if the issue has ever occurred before. Record your answers to each question until you arrive at a list of potential solutions. With these answers, you can go through the same process of asking questions step by step until you identify the most appropriate solution.

**Flowchart**

A flow chart is a diagram you can use to represent the divisions of a problem or the steps of a business process. To create a flowchart, write the title of the problem in the middle of the page or whiteboard and draw a circle around it. Outline the various processes, such as the purchasing of the product, payment method, customer complaint, errors associated with the product, and results of a quality check. Outlining the processes using a flowchart can help you visualize the cause of the problem and in which process it occurred.

**Benchmarking**

Benchmarking refers to comparing various business processes and outcomes with other successful companies to see how each measure compares. Benchmarking can typically contrast specific processes or outcomes, such as customer satisfaction, product quality, sales, profit margin, and return on investment. Different types of benchmarks can show how your processes compare with other leading companies. Performance benchmarking can also help you identify strengths and weaknesses in key performance indicators (KPIs). Each comparison metric for KPIs can highlight areas in your processes or in individual performances so you can improve and address techniques for improving.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

**Five Whys**

The five whys strategy involves asking why five times in succession to produce a potential solution to a problem. For example, if product quality assurance checks are finding more frequent production errors, you start by asking why and recording the answer. If you notice one piece of equipment required service maintenance recently, write this as one of your answers. Once you have a list of potential solutions, you ask the same question again for each answer you gave in the previous section. Continue this process five times in succession or until you determine an effective countermeasure to implement.

**Goals grid**

A goals grid is a diagram with four quadrants where you can record your answers to a series of questions. Typically, questions relate to what you want but don't have, what you have and want to preserve, what you don't have and don't want, and what you have but don't want. You can create a list of bullet points for each question.

For example, in the section where you outline what you want but don't have, you might write about launching new international products or services. In the second quadrant, you might write about incurring excess marketing costs and late customer payments for things you don't have and want to continue avoiding. For the problem-solving process, your four quadrants might represent values such as what a potential solution might include, what processes the problem involves, and how you can avoid this problem in the future.

**Mind map**

A mind map is a diagram that starts with a central concept or idea that you can derive ideas from and visualize the various components to make connections. The goal of a mind map is to create a visual representation of the aspects of a problem so you can highlight important elements so you brainstorm more solutions. Start by writing your concept in the middle of the page and drawing a circle around it. Then, draw a line connecting the central idea with an aspect or subcategory of what you want to explore, and continue this process until you outline each relevant component. You may also derive new branches from subheadings if you want to elaborate further on the idea or feature.
 
#### Root cause analysis
 
Root cause analysis (RCA) is the process of discovering the root causes of problems in order to identify appropriate solutions. RCA assumes that it is much more effective to systematically prevent and solve for underlying issues rather than just treating ad hoc symptoms and putting out fires. Root cause analysis can be performed with a collection of principles, techniques, and methodologies that can all be leveraged to identify the root causes of an event or trend. Looking beyond superficial cause and effect, RCA can show where processes or systems failed or caused an issue in the first place.

**Core principles**

- There are a few core principles that guide effective root cause analysis, some of which should already be apparent. Not only will these help the analysis quality, these will also help the analyst gain trust and buy-in from stakeholders, clients, or patients.

- Focus on correcting and remedying root causes rather than just symptoms.

- Don’t ignore the importance of treating symptoms for short term relief.

- Realize there can be, and often are, multiple root causes.

- Focus on HOW and WHY something happened, not WHO was responsible.

- Be methodical and find concrete cause-effect evidence to back up root cause claims.

- Provide enough information to inform a corrective course of action.

- Consider how a root cause can be prevented (or replicated) in the future.

- As the above principles illustrate: when we analyze deep issues and causes, it’s important to take a comprehensive and holistic approach. In addition to discovering the root cause, we should strive to provide context and information that will result in an action or a decision. Remember: good analysis is actionable analysis.

**Benefits and goals of root cause analysis**

__The first goal__ of root cause analysis is to discover the root cause of a problem or event. __The second goal__ is to fully understand how to fix, compensate, or learn from any underlying issues within the root cause. __The third goal__ is to apply what we learn from this analysis to systematically prevent future issues or to repeat successes. Analysis is only as good as what we do with that analysis, so the third goal of RCA is important. We can use RCA to also modify core process and system issues in a way that prevents future problems. Instead of just treating the symptoms of a football player’s concussion, for example, root cause analysis might suggest wearing a helmet to reduce the risk of future concussions. Treating the individual symptoms may feel productive. Solving a large number of problems looks like something is getting done. But if we don’t actually diagnose the real root cause of a problem we’ll likely have the same exact problem over and over. Instead of a news editor just fixing every single omitted Oxford comma, she will prevent further issues by training her writers to use commas properly in all future assignments.

**Problem-Solving Root Cause Analysis Tools**

The Ishikawa Fishbone Diagram (IFD)

The model introduced by Ishikawa (also known as the fishbone diagram) is considered one of the most robust methods for conducting root cause analysis. This model uses the assessment of the 6Ms as a methodology for identifying the true or most probable root cause to determine corrective and preventive actions. The 6Ms include:

- Man

- Machine

- Methods

- Materials

- Measurement,

- Mother Nature- i.e., Environment

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

**Pareto Chart**

The Pareto Chart is a series of bars whose heights reflect the frequency or impact of problems. On the Chart, bars are arranged in descending order of height from left to right, which means the categories represented by the tall bars on the left are relatively more frequent than those on the right.

**5 Whys**

This model uses the 5 Why by asking why 5 times to find the root cause of the problem. It generally takes five iterations of the questioning process to arrive at the root cause of the problem and that's why this model got its name as 5 Whys. But it is perfectly fine for a facilitator to ask less or more questions depending on the needs.

**Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)**
- FMEA is a technique used to identify process and product problems before they occur. It focuses on how and when a system will fail, not if it will fail. In this model, each failure mode is assessed for:

  - Severity (S)

  - Occurrence (O)

  - Detection (D)

- A combination of the three scores produces a risk priority number (RPN). The RPN is then provided a ranking system to prioritize which problem must gain more attention first.

**Scatter Diagram**

- A scatter diagram also known as a scatter plot is a graph in which the values of two variables are plotted along two axes, the pattern of the resulting points revealing any correlation present.To use scatter plots in root cause analysis, an independent variable or suspected cause is plotted on the x-axis and the dependent variable (the effect) is plotted on the y-axis. If the pattern reflects a clear curve or line, it means they are correlated. If required, more sophisticated correlation analyses can be continued.

**Affinity Diagram**

- Also known as KJ Diagram, this model is used to represent the structure of big and complex factors that impact a problem or a situation. It divides these factors into small classifications according to their similarity to assist in identifying the major causes of the problem.

**Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)**

- The Fault Tree Analysis uses Boolean logic to arrive at the cause of a problem. It begins with a defined problem and works backward to identify what factors contributed to the problem using a graphical representation called the Fault Tree. It takes a top-down approach starting with the problem and evaluating the factors that caused the problem.

- Finding the root cause isn't an easy because there is not always one root cause. You may have to repeat your experiment several times to arrive at it to eliminate the encountered problem. Using a scientific approach to solving problem works. So, its important to learn the several problem-solving tools and techniques at your fingertips so you can use the ones appropriate for different situations.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

**Five steps of a root cause analysis**

<ins>Step 1.</ins> Define the problem.

<ins>Step 2.Collect data.</ins>

<ins>Step 3. Identify causal factors.</ins>

<ins>Step 4. Identify root cause(s).</ins>

<ins>Step 5. Implement solutions.</ins>

**Tips for Performing Effective Root Cause Analysis**

- <ins>Collaborate with other teams.</ins> Gain a diverse range of experiences and expertise by working with relevant people from other teams. They can likely offer different perspectives that will help to find the various causes of the problem.

- <ins>Don’t play the blame game!</ins> Root cause analysis is a tool that helps you and your team overcome problems, but it shouldn’t be used to criticize or blame someone. Instead, try to create a blame-free culture, so that your co-workers feel confident in sharing ideas and insights. This will help you to diagnose the issue quickly and effectively.

- <ins>Keep your questions open-ended.</ins> Leave any assumptions you have about the potential causes of the problem at the door. RCA is a chance to look at a problem with fresh eyes, so use open-ended questions as you work through the five steps. This will allow you to reveal things you didn’t already know, and find the most effective solution.